---
title: "Ageing of topographic tactile maps and their behavioural implications"
collection: conference_presentations
type: "Talks"
permalink: /conference_presentations/2023-talk-2
venue: "Psychologie and Gehirn (PuG) 2023"
date: 2023-06-10
location: "Tübingen, Deutschland"
---

[More information here](https://pug2023.de/home/en/)

Topographic maps are a fundamental feature of cortex architecture in the mammalian brain. Their malfunctions can give rise to a multitude of sensory, motor, and cognitive functions and associated deficits. One common theory is that brain ageing leads to the ‘de-differentiation’ of topographic maps, which can be conceptualised as greater map activation, larger map area, more noisy units and/or less cortical inhibition between neighbouring units. Moreover the de-differentiation process was assumed to give rise to maladaptive behaviour. With the combination of ultra-high resolution 7T functional magnetic resonance imaging (7T-fMRI) of human primary somatosensory cortex (S1) topographic maps, computational modelling and psychophysical assessments of everyday sensory and motor tasks, we disproved this theory. We found that older adults do not show greater map activation or larger map areas, but show larger population receptive field sizes (i.e., the cumulative response of a population of neurons within a fMRI voxel), more overlapping neighbouring sensory representations but less similar distant representations, and reduced cortical distance (i.e., the distance between finger representations) between index finger and middle finger representations in S1. Given the latter was related to worse finger individuation but better motor performance, the present work uncovers the drawbacks of a simple de-differentiation model of topographic map function, and motivates the introduction of feature-based models of cortical reorganisation. This does not only allow us to investigate human sensory ageing more comprehensively, but also help us better understand age-related changes in topographic map architectures and their behavioural correlates.
